Apophis (; Ancient Greek: Ἄποφις, romanized: Ápophis), also known as Apep (Ancient Egyptian: ꜥꜣpp) or Aphoph (, Coptic: Ⲁⲫⲱⲫ, romanized: Aphōph) is the ancient Egyptian deity of the underworld who embodied darkness and disorder, and was thus the opponent of light and Maat (order/truth). Ra was the bringer of light and hence the biggest opposer of Apophis.


== Features ==
Because Ra was the solar deity, bringer of light, and thus the upholder of Maat, Apophis was viewed as the greatest enemy of Ra, and thus was given the title Enemy of Ra, and also "the Lord of Chaos".
"The Lord of Chaos" was seen as a giant snake or serpent leading to such titles as Serpent from the Nile and Evil Dragon. Some elaborations said that he stretched 16 yards in length and had a head made of flint. 
Presented on a Naqada I (c. 4000–3550 BCE) C-ware bowl (now in Cairo) a snake was painted on the inside rim combined with other desert and aquatic animals as an enemy of a deity, seemingly a solar deity, who is invisibly hunting in a big rowing vessel. The snake on the inside rim is believed to be Apophis.
The few descriptions of the origin of Apophis in myth usually demonstrate that it was born after Ra, usually from his umbilical cord. Geraldine Pinch claims that a much later creation myth explained that, "Apophis sprang from the saliva of the goddess Neith when she was still in the primeval waters. Her spit became a snake 120 yards long." 
But Apophis was commonly believed to have existed from the beginning of time in the waters of Nu of primeval chaos.


== Battles with Ra ==

Tales of Apophis battles against Ra were elaborated during the New Kingdom. Storytellers said that every day Apophis must lie below the horizon and not persist in the mortal kingdom. This appropriately made him a part of the underworld. In some stories, Apophis waited for Ra in a western mountain called Manu, where the sun set, and in others, Apophis lurked just before dawn, in the Tenth region of the Night. The wide range of Apophis' possible locations gained him the title World-Encircler. It was thought that his terrifying roar would cause the underworld to rumble. Myths sometimes say that Apophis was trapped there, because he had been the previous chief god overthrown by Ra, or because he was evil and had been imprisoned.
The Coffin Texts imply that Apophis used a magical gaze to overwhelm Ra and his entourage. Ra was assisted by a number of defenders who travelled with him, including Set and possibly the Eye of Ra. Apophis movements were thought to cause earthquakes, and his battles with Set may have been meant to explain the origin of thunderstorms. In one account, Ra himself defeats Apophis in the form of a cat.


== Religious practices ==
Ra's victory each night was thought to be ensured by the prayers of the Egyptian priests and worshippers at temples. The Egyptians practiced a number of rituals and superstitions that were thought to ward off Apophis and to aid Ra in continuing his journey across the sky.
In an annual rite called the Ritual of Overthrowing Apophis, priests would build an effigy of Apophis that was thought to contain all of the evil and darkness in Egypt, and burn it to protect everyone from Apophis evil for another year.
The Egyptian priests had a detailed guide to fighting Apophis, referred to as The Books of Overthrowing Apep (or the Book of Apophis, in Greek). The chapters described a gradual process of dishonoring, dismemberment, and disposal, which include:

Spitting Upon Apophis
Defiling Apophis with the Left Foot
Taking a Lance to Smite Apophis
Fettering Apophis
Taking a Knife to Smite Apophis
Putting Fire Upon Apophis
In addition to stories about Ra's victories, this guide had instructions for making wax models, or small drawings, of the serpent, which would be spat on, mutilated and burnt, whilst reciting spells that would aid Ra in killing Apophis. Fearing that even the image of Apophis could give power to the demon, any rendering would always include another deity to subdue the monster.
As Apophis was thought to live in the underworld, he was sometimes thought of as an Eater of Souls. Thus the dead also needed protection, so they were sometimes buried with spells that could destroy Apophis . The Book of the Dead does not frequently describe occasions when Ra defeated the chaos snake explicitly called Apophis. Only Book of the Dead Spells 7 and 39 can be explained as such.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==
99942 Apophis, near Earth asteroid
Apep (star system), triple star system that is a gamma-ray burst progenitor in the Milky Way
Apollyon
Ethnoherpetology
Referenced in John Langan's The Fisherman (novel), the world-girdling serpent harnessed as a source of magical potency
Nikko Jenkins, American criminal who motivated his series of murders by claiming that he is a worshipper of Apophis
Jörmungandr
Mehen
Ouroboros
Python (mythology)
Unut
Vritra
Wadjet
Leviathan
Satan
Ancient serpent


== References ==


== External links ==

Apep, Water Snake-Demon of Chaos, Enemy of Ra...
Ancient Egypt: The Mythology - Apep